A: Myth: Type 2 diabetes is a mild form of diabetes
There is no such thing as mild diabetes. All diabetes is serious and, if not properly controlled, can lead to serious complications.
Differences between type 1 and type 2 diabetes
There are differences in the causes, onset of symptoms and treatment of type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes. If you have type 1 or type 2 diabetes, it means there's too much glucose (a type of sugar) in your blood due to a problem with the hormone insulin. Both are serious conditions that can lead to serious health complications.
When you've got type 1 diabetes, your body cannot make any insulin at all. The insulin-producing cells have been attacked and destroyed by your immune system. This is why type 1 diabetes is known as an autoimmune condition.  

Type 2 diabetes isn’t an autoimmune condition. Your body isn’t making enough insulin or what it makes isn’t working properly. This can be for many reasons. 

Type 1 diabetes affects 8% of people living with diabetes and type 2 diabetes affects 90% of people living with diabetes. There are also lots of other types of diabetes. 

Whatever type of diabetes you have, you need the information, treatment and support to help you manage it.   

Type 1 vs type 2 diabetes differences
Below is a guide to some of the main differences between type 1 and type 2 diabetes. 
1. 🔬 Causes
Type 1 Diabetes:
Type 1 diabetes is caused by an autoimmune reaction where the body attacks the insulin-producing cells in the pancreas. As a result, the body cannot produce any insulin.

Type 2 Diabetes:
In type 2 diabetes, the body either doesn’t produce enough insulin or the insulin it does produce doesn’t work properly (known as insulin resistance).

2. 🧬 Risk Factors
Type 1 Diabetes:
The exact cause of type 1 diabetes is still unknown. However, having a family history may slightly increase the risk, as certain genes are associated with type 1.

Type 2 Diabetes:
Risk factors include age, family history, ethnicity, waist size, and living with overweight or obesity.

3. ⚠️ Symptoms
Type 1 Diabetes:
Symptoms usually appear suddenly and progress quickly, often within days or weeks.

Type 2 Diabetes:
Symptoms develop more slowly and can be subtle or even go unnoticed for a long time.

4. 💊 Management
Type 1 Diabetes:
Type 1 diabetes is managed by taking insulin. People need to count the carbohydrates they consume and balance this with insulin doses. Being physically active, eating a healthy diet, and attending regular health checks are also important.

Type 2 Diabetes:
Unlike type 1, type 2 diabetes can sometimes be managed without insulin or medication. A healthy lifestyle—including regular activity, balanced eating, and health checks—can help control blood sugar levels. Some people may still require medication.

5. 🔄 Cure and Prevention
Type 1 Diabetes:
There is currently no cure, but research is ongoing.

Type 2 Diabetes:
While it cannot be cured, there is evidence that type 2 diabetes can often be prevented, and in many cases, it can go into remission with sustained lifestyle changes.
 


Symptoms of type 1 and type 2
Type 1 and type 2 diabetes share common symptoms. They are:

Toilet - going for a wee a lot, especially at night.
Thirsty - being really thirsty.
Tired - feeling more tired than usual.
Thinner - losing weight without trying to.
Genital itching or thrush.
Cuts and wounds take longer to heal.
Blurred eyesight
Increased hunger.
But where type 1 and type 2 diabetes are different in symptom is how they appear. Type 1 can often appear quickly and there are four common ones, which we call the 4Ts of type 1 diabetes. Adults with type 1 diabetes may not recognise diabetes symptoms as quickly as we might spot them in children. It is important to recognise the signs and symptoms as a delay in diagnosis and treatment can lead to diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA).

But type 2 diabetes can be easier to miss because the symptoms are not so obvious. This is because it develops more slowly, especially in the early stages. That is why it is important to know your risk of developing type 2 diabetes. Some people have diabetes and don’t know it. They can have it for up to 10 years without knowing.

The emotional impact of type 1 and type 2 diabetes
It is important to understand that a long-term condition can come with an emotional impact. And we know that living with type 1 diabetes or type 2 diabetes can sometimes feel overwhelming.

And confusion from others about what causes the condition and how you look after yourself doesn't help. We know from our insight work that people living with diabetes find it emotionally draining to constantly correct and educate people. And that they worry about stigma.

But there is lots of support available to you, like our helpline where you can talk to one of our trained advisors about how you're feeling. And you can also speak to people who are going through similar experiences on our forum or through our local groups.

Listen to our diabetes podcast on stigma which features Jim, who lives with type 1 diabetes and Nicki who lives with type 2 diabetes. 

Can type 1 or type 2 be cured or prevented?
Unfortunately, there’s currently no permanent cure for either type 1 or type 2 diabetes.

However we are funding research into type 1 screening for people who may be at risk of developing type 1 diabetes in the future as new treatment has being developed which can delay type 1 diabetes to those people found to be at risk of developing it.

There is also evidence that some people with type 2 can put their diabetes into remission by losing weight. Following a very low-calorie diet under medical supervision, or having surgery are some ways you can put your type 2 diabetes into remission.

B: Myth: People with diabetes cannot have sugar
Having diabetes does not mean you have to have a sugar-free diet. People with diabetes should follow a healthy balanced diet – that is low in fat, salt and sugar. You should still be able to enjoy a wide variety of foods, including some with sugar.

Sugar and diabetes
SugarYou don’t need to cut out sugar from your diet if you have diabetes. And while we don’t know exactly what causes type 1 diabetes, but it isn’t linked to lifestyle, and so sugar doesn’t directly cause the condition. 
The question of whether sugar directly causes type 2 diabetes is a bit complicated.

Because diabetes is a condition where blood sugar levels are too high, it’s all too easy to think eating too much sugar is the cause. But what’s the truth about sugar and how does it affect diabetes? 

In this article we’ll explain whether sugar causes diabetes, how to cut down on sugar and how to read food labels to make informed decisions about your diet. 

Where sugar is found in your diet
Sugar is found naturally in fruit, vegetables (fructose) and dairy foods (lactose). It’s also added to food and drink by food manufacturers, or by ourselves at home. These types of added sugars are called ‘free sugars’ and they are also present in pure fruit juices, smoothies, syrups and honey. The debate about sugar and health is mainly around free sugars. 

This includes:

table sugar that we add to our hot drinks or breakfast cereal
caster sugar, used in baking
sugars hidden in sauces, ready meals, cakes and drinks.
honey and syrups, like golden syrup or agave syrup 
pure fruit juice 
smoothies. 
Does sugar cause diabetes?
There are two main types of diabetes – type 1 and type 2 diabetes. 

We know that sugar does not cause type 1 diabetes, nor is it caused by anything else in your lifestyle. In type 1 diabetes, the insulin producing cells in your pancreas are destroyed by your immune system. 

With type 2 diabetes, the answer is a little more complex. Though we know sugar doesn’t directly cause type 2 diabetes, you are more likely to get it if you are overweight. You gain weight when you take in more calories than your body needs, and sugary foods and drinks contain a lot of calories.

So you can see if too much sugar is making you put on weight, then you are increasing your risk of getting type 2 diabetes. But type 2 diabetes is complex, and sugar is unlikely to be the only reason the condition develops.

We also know that sugar sweetened drinks, like canned soft drinks, are associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes, and this is not necessarily linked to their effect on body weight. 

Find out your risk of type 2 diabetes.

Sugar and diabetes and your diet
We all enjoy eating sugary foods occasionally, and there’s no problem including them as a treat occasionally as part of a healthy, balanced diet. And, for some people with diabetes, sugary drinks or glucose tablets are essential to treat a hypo, when your blood glucose levels get too low.

However, we are eating too much free sugar and harming our health as a result. Being overweight can make it difficult to manage your diabetes and increase your risk of getting serious health problems such as heart disease and stroke in the future. Too much sugar is bad for your teeth too.

The maximum recommended daily amount of sugar is 30g for adults – which works out at just seven teaspoons a day. Given that a tablespoon of ketchup contains around one teaspoon of sugar, a chocolate biscuit has up to two, and a small serving of baked beans almost three, you can see how quickly the teaspoons tot up.

How to cut down on sugar
You don’t have to cut sugar out of your diet completely. Sugar is found naturally in fruit, vegetables and dairy foods, and most of us in the UK are not getting the recommended five fruit and veg a day so it’s important we don’t cut these out as they are so good for you. 

It’s better to eat whole fruit and vegetables rather than having juices or smoothies, as even the pure fruit juices contribute to free sugar intake. If you do have juice, keep to just one small glass – 150ml – a day.

It’s the free sugar that we all need to cut down on. And it’s not just the obviously sweet things like biscuits and chocolate. It’s the hidden sugar lurking in many foods, such as baked beans, pasta sauces, tomato ketchup, yogurts and ready meals. Some drinks are packed with sugar, too.

Simple changes can dramatically reduce the amount of free sugar in your diet. This could include:

Instead of chocolate bars, sweets, cakes and biscuits, choose healthier snacks such as unsweetened yogurts, unsalted nuts, seeds, fruits and vegetables. For example, try natural yogurt mixed in with chopped fruit or a small handful of nuts.
Experiment with reducing the sugar you use in recipes – most recipes will work just as well.
Try artificial sweetener in place of sugar.
If you normally have sugary drinks, choose diet fizzy drinks and no added sugar squashes instead. Or go for water with natural flavourings, like mint or sliced lemon. Sugary drinks are best used as a treatment for hypos.
Try to cook from scratch where possible. That way you can be sure of what's in your food. Check out our tasty, easy-to-follow and simple recipes.
Keep an eye on reduced-fat foods. Many actually contain more sugar as food manufactures add sugar to compensate for the altered taste and texture caused by the fat being removed. Look at the whole food label to be sure.
"Low-fat foods, such as yogurts, can be higher in sugar, so always check labels for ingredients.”
Margaret, 73, who has type 2 diabetes

Reading food labels
Food labels are the best way to work out how much sugar is in what you're eating. The figures for sugar are for the total sugar in that food item, and don’t tell you how much of the sugar comes from natural sources, such as in fruit, and how much comes from free sugar. 

Some foods and drink don’t have the word ‘sugar’ in the ingredients list, but still have sugar added. Honey, sucrose, glucose, glucose syrup, dextrose, fructose, hydrolysed starch, corn and maize syrup are all free sugars. If you see any of these words on the ingredients list, you know sugar has been added.

To see whether a product is high in free sugar look at the ingredients list, which always starts with the biggest ingredient first. So if sugar or syrup is listed in the first few ingredients, the product you’re buying will contain a high proportion of sugar. 
Alcohol and diabetes
Alcohol and diabetes
Alcohol and diabetes can be a tricky subject. But having diabetes shouldn’t get in the way of being able to drink alcohol, unless this has been advised on medical grounds.  

On this page:

Can I drink alcohol if I have diabetes?  
Does alcohol cause diabetes?
Alcohol and hypos 
Alcohol and your weight  
Alcohol and carbohydrates
Managing diabetes and drinking 
The morning after
Alcohol, fertility and pregnancy
Alcohol and your emotions
Healthier drink choices
Can I drink alcohol if I have diabetes?  
You can drink alcohol if you have diabetes unless your diabetes team has advised you not to.  

But you need to be aware of how it can affect your body and how to manage this. For example, drinking can make you more likely to have a hypo, otherwise known as low blood sugar or hypoglycaemia, because alcohol interferes with your blood sugar levels. It can affect your weight too, as there can be a lot of calories in alcoholic drinks.  

It’s sensible to keep within government guidelines on alcohol units (see these below). 

Does alcohol cause diabetes? 
Alcohol doesn’t cause diabetes but drinking to excess can increase your risk of type 2 diabetes. That’s partly because alcohol has a lot of calories, which can lead to weight gain. And living with overweight or obesity is one of the risk factors for type 2 diabetes.  

So the safest way to drink alcohol is to stay within government guidelines.   

Take a look at our information about risk factors and find out your risk of developing type 2 diabetes.  

Government guidelines on alcohol units 
To help keep health risks from alcohol at a low level, it’s safest not to regularly drink more than 14 units a week. These guidelines are the same for men and women. The guidelines also recommend that if you choose to drink up to 14 units a week, spread this over at least three days.  Try to have a few alcohol-free days too.   

But what does this mean when you’re in the pub or having dinner with a glass of wine at home? 

One unit equals 10ml or 8g of pure alcohol, which is roughly a single measure (25ml) of spirits or half a pint of lower-strength beer. This It means you shouldn’t drink more than six pints of lager or six medium glasses of wine a week. 

But the size of the glass and type of alcohol affects the number of units, so it’s best to check how many units are in your drink and the guidelines at Alcohol Change UK. 

Alcohol labels 
ABV means alcohol by volume. The strength of alcoholic drinks has increased over the years, with new wines from South America, South Australia and South Africa containing 14% ABV or higher – this means that a bottle will contain approximately 10.5 units and 750 calories, and a large glass of wine (250ml) can be over 3 units and 200 calories. 

Many labels on alcoholic drinks clearly depict the alcohol and calorie content so, just like food labels, it pays to look at them closely.  

Alcohol and hypos 
If you use insulin or some other diabetes medications like sulphonylureas, you’re more likely to have a hypo. Drinking alcohol can then add to this, because alcohol reduces your body’s ability to recover when blood sugar levels are dropping.  

Usually, the liver stores extra glucose which is released back into the blood when needed, such as when blood sugar levels drop. But alcohol stands in the way of the liver’s ability to do this effectively.  

If you’re not sure whether your medication can cause hypos or if they're affected by alcohol, it’s best to speak to your healthcare team.  

If you drink a lot or on an empty stomach, you’re even more likely to have a hypo.  

Your risk of having a hypo doesn't go away after you stop drinking – it increases and can last up to 24 hours. 

Some people may use a continuous glucose monitor (CGM) to monitor their sugar levels. With flash glucose monitors and CGMs you can set alarms to alert you if your blood sugar levels go too low or too high. These can help you to act quickly if your levels go too low when you’ve been drinking. This is something you can discuss with your healthcare team.   

It’s not uncommon for some people to mistake having a hypo for being drunk. So, carry  hypo treatments around with you and always wear some medical ID. You should also make sure that whoever you’re with knows you have diabetes, and knows how to help with a hypo if you need them to. 

Alcohol and your weight 
Depending on what you like to drink, there can be a lot of calories in alcohol. So if you’re trying to lose weight, you may want to drink less. Alcohol stops your body burning fat as all its attention is turned to burning off the alcohol, which makes weight loss more difficult.  

Alcohol also reduces production of the hormone leptin which tells your brain you’re full. This may be the reason why drinking alcohol makes you feel hungrier as leptin levels drop and you might be more likely to tuck into a late-night kebab. 

It also reduces your willpower - you are less likely to go for the healthier option when out for a meal, cooking a meal, or raiding the fridge at home and these effects can last the next day. 

Alcohol and carbohydrates 
If you’re carb counting, drinking can make it a lot more tricky. While a lot of alcoholic drinks contain carbs, you might not need to take your usual mealtime amount of insulin to cover them. That’s because you’re more likely to have hypos.  

It all depends on what you drink, how much you drink, and what else you’re doing while you’re drinking – like eating or dancing. So it’s best to talk to your healthcare team and get their advice before thinking about adjusting your insulin for alcohol. 

Managing diabetes and drinking 
If you have type 1 diabetes, courses like DAFNE can give you advice on how different types of alcoholic drinks can affect your blood glucose levels, and also suggest appropriate insulin adjustment and where this may be necessary.  

However, it is stressed on the course that people may respond to alcohol in different ways, and it’s advised that monitoring your blood glucose before and after drinking will help you to discover your own requirements.  

The morning after you’ve been drinking 
If you end up having one too many, drinking a pint of water before you go to bed will help keep you hydrated. If you’re lucky, it may also help prevent a hangover in the morning. If you do wake up with a hangover, it’ll still help to drink plenty of water. 

And always have breakfast – it will help you manage your blood sugar. If you can’t face food or you’ve been sick, drink as many fluids as possible including some sugary (non-diet) drinks if your blood sugar levels are low.  

Checking your blood sugar levels regularly the next day may help you prevent a hypo before it happens. The symptoms of having a hypo are similar to feelings of a hangover, so you need to know if you’re having one. No matter how awful you feel, you need to treat a hypo straight away. Don’t ignore it. 

If you take insulin, you might need to change your dose depending on what your blood sugar levels are. Talk to your healthcare team about what you should be doing. 

Types of alcoholic drinks 
There's no 'best' alcoholic drink for people with diabetes. If you're going to drink, it's good to be aware of all the facts so you can choose the types of drinks best for you: 

Avoid low-sugar beers and cider – sometimes called diabetic drinks. They might have less sugar, but there's more alcohol in them.  
Avoid low-alcohol wines – these often have more sugar than normal ones. If you do choose these, just stick to a glass or two. Try to limit drinks with a lot of sugar, such as sweet sherries, sweet wines and liqueurs.  
Choose alcohol-free alternatives. Alcohol-free beers, ciders, wines, and spirits are now widely available.  But be aware that these still have some free (added) sugars and carbs which will affect blood sugar levels.  Water is the best drink to choose – it is sugar, carb and calorie free.   
Have diet or sugar-free mixers with any spirits – if a friend gets one for you, make it clear what you need.  
Some drinks like beers, ales and ciders contain carbs and will increase your blood sugar levels initially. Spirits, dry wines and Prosecco not so much, so these may be a better bet if you are concerned about the carbs in alcohol. 
Other health risks from drinking alcohol
If you have diabetes, you should be aware of the other health risks around drinking. That way, you can help to avoid them by limiting how much you drink. Here are a few things to watch out for: 

Excessive alcohol, or heavy drinking, can lead to raised blood pressure.
Alcohol can make neuropathy (nerve damage) worse. 
It dehydrates your body and stops you sleeping properly. 
It can also lead to certain cancers and heart disease. 
Alcohol, fertility and pregnancy  
Alcohol intake can affect fertility in men and women, so if you are trying for a baby it is important to cut back.  

For pregnant women the safest option is not to drink alcohol at all during pregnancy. In particular, drinking alcohol during the first three months of pregnancy may increase the risk of a miscarriage.  

Excessive alcohol intake during pregnancy is never a good idea, and the more alcohol you drink the greater the risk to your baby. These risks include stillbirth, premature birth and foetal alcohol syndrome. 

Alcohol and your emotions 
Some people find that alcohol helps them deal with stress or when they're feeling low. It might make you feel more relaxed, but it’s not a healthy way of managing these feelings.  

Getting more active can really help if you’re stressed or feeling anxious. Starting a hobby with a friend, or doing something relaxing like having a long bath or reading a book can all help. 

You can talk to your healthcare team about how you're feeling, they'll be able to give you more advice and support about what might help. Or you might prefer to talk to someone close to you, like a friend or family member.  

Remember, you can get in touch with our helpline. They are there to listen and will be able to give you more advice. 

Healthier drink choices 
Read on for some useful tips to keep the calories and alcohol down: 

Make a long drink with a shot of spirits such as vodka or rum and use plenty of a mixer such as diet lemonade, diet ginger ale, diet cola or water. Top with plenty of ice. 
Go for lower-strength beers and wines, but avoid low-alcohol drinks like Kaliber, Swan Light and Becks Blue as these drinks contain only carbohydrate and so are similar to drinking ordinary sugary drinks and are not recommended for people with diabetes. 
Just like using smaller plates can help you to eat less food, using smaller wine and beer glasses can help you drink less - try it, it really does work! 
Keep your drinking time to a set time. Having a drink at meal times works for some people. 
Measure drinks out at home as opposed to pouring from the bottle. 
Alternate with soft drinks. Having a glass of water between alcoholic drinks is a good way of pacing yourself and avoiding the dehydrating effects of alcohol. It will also give you more time to see the impact that alcohol is having on your blood sugar levels.  

C: Myth: People with diabetes should eat 'diabetic' foods
'Diabetic' labelling tends to be used on sweets, biscuits and similar foods that are generally high in fat, especially saturated fat and calories. Diabetes UK does not recommend eating 'diabetic' foods, including diabetic chocolate, because they still affect your blood glucose levels, they are expensive and they can give you diarrhoea. So, if you are going to treat yourself, you should go for the real thing.
'Diabetic foods'
Diabetes UK are calling for an end to the use of terms such as 'diabetic' or 'suitable for diabetics' on food labels.

This position statement is intended to help people with diabetes make more informed choices when buying foods, and to encourage manufacturers and retailers to label products responsibly.

Diabetes UK and the European Commission (EC) have concluded that there is no role or benefit from the use of diabetic foods. Diabetes UK will continue to work on influencing manufacturers and retailers to ensure that consumers are not misled by labelling food as diabetic or suitable for diabetics.

D: Myth: People with diabetes eventually go blind
Although diabetes is the leading cause of blindness in people of working age in the UK, research has proved you can reduce your chances of developing diabetes complications – such as damage to your eyes – if you:

control your blood pressure, glucose, and blood fat levels
keep active
maintain your ideal body weight
give up smoking.

E: Myth: It's not safe to drive if you have diabetes
Providing you are responsible and have good control of your diabetes, research shows that people with diabetes are no less safe on the roads than anyone else. Nevertheless, the myth that people with diabetes are not safe persists.

Diabetes UK is working with the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) in England, Scotland and Wales and the Driver and Vehicle Agency (DVA) in Northern Ireland to ensure that the process for applying and reapplying for driving licences is fair, safe and transparent.
Driving and diabetes
For most people with diabetes, driving isn’t a problem, and they can hold a driving licence and carry on driving. Here you’ll find everything you need to know about diabetes and driving.
"As someone with diabetes, it's really important that I'm aware of the rules around driving in the UK" -  Mim 

How diabetes can affect driving 
There are three main things about diabetes that can affect your ability to drive safely:

If how you treat your diabetes means you’re at risk of having a hypo (where your blood sugar drops below 4mmol/l).
Being unable to recognise the warning symptoms of hypos – known as hypo unawareness.
If you develop diabetes complications that make it harder for you to drive – like problems with your eyes (retinopathy) or nerve damage (neuropathy).
If these things affect you, you need to know what the rules are and what you need to tell your local driver and licensing authority. 

The rules are different depending on what vehicle you want to drive. Here we’ll talk mainly about what you need to know if you want to drive a car or motorbike (called a Group 1 licence).

To drive a lorry or larger vehicle, you’ll need a Group 2 licence. There are different rules for this type of licence and they can be more complicated when you are driving with diabetes.

 

 

These rules come from the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) in England, Scotland and Wales, and the Driver and Vehicle Agency (DVA) in Northern Ireland. We use DVLA throughout this information, to make things simpler.

And remember, you need to know these rules if these things could affect you in the future if not now.

Driving and how you treat your diabetes
Can you still drive if you have diabetes? It depends if how you treat your diabetes means you're at risk of hypos, as this can affect your ability to drive safely. 

So what makes you at risk of having hypos? Hypos can affect people who take certain medication to treat their diabetes, including insulin and medications like sulphonylureas. And some hypos can be really severe where you need help to treat them. Speak to your healthcare team if you’re not sure whether you’re at risk of having these and what you can do to prevent them. If you already know you're at risk of hypos, follow our checklist each and every time you drive.

However you treat your diabetes, use our table explaining the rules for your driving licence based on each type of treatment.
Driving with diabetes - know the facts 
Driving and eye complications
Retinopathy is damage to the blood vessels supplying the eye’s retina (the seeing part at the back of the eye) and it can cause sight loss. It’s linked to high blood sugars and high blood pressure so it’s more common in people with diabetes.

If you start having problems with your eyes, you need to let the DVLA know and you may need a special diabetes eye test for driving. It’ll be done at an optician near you that’s recommended by the DVLA and they’ll pay for it. 

Some eye problems can be treated successfully which means you can reapply for your licence. Ask your healthcare team if you’re not sure.

Driving and hypo unawareness 
If you develop hypo unawareness – where you no longer have any warning signs of the onset of hypos (hypoglycaemia), you’ll need to let the DVLA know. You will have to stop driving. This still applies if you are using a continuous glucose monitor that alerts you with an alarm when your blood sugar levels are going low. See the latest DVLA guidance on hypo unawareness on the GOV.UK website. 

Other diabetes complications that can affect driving
Neuropathy affects your nerves. Damage to your nerves can mean you lose feeling in your hands and feet, as well as causing problems in various other parts of your body. If it’s severe then you should ask your healthcare team or the DVLA for more advice. 

If neuropathy or an amputation mean you need an adapted vehicle, you’ll have to apply for an adapted vehicle licence from the DVLA. Diabetes complications shouldn't have to stop you driving. 

Heart complications can affect your ability to drive and being able to hold a licence. Your specialist heart team must advise you here. 

Other conditions the DVLA need to know about include things that could cause loss of consciousness or concentration, like sleep apnoea. This can make it harder for you to concentrate in the day due to extreme sleepiness. Talk to your healthcare team or sleep clinic about this.

They also need to know about any problems you develop that make it difficult to negotiate traffic or act quickly. For example a stroke, which is a cardiovascular complication, is when blood can't get to the brain and it's starved of vital oxygen and nutrients. This can happen if your blood vessels are damaged or blocked and can make it harder for you to react quickly.

We have lots of information to help you understand the DVLA diabetes rule and when to talk to the DVLA about your driving licence – we’ve created tables about Group 1 and Group 2 licenses to help you find the information you need quickly and easily.

Your driving checklist if you’re at risk of hypos
Follow this diabetes driving hypo checklist each and every time you drive. It’s how you reduce your risk of a hypo at the wheel. And it’s how you can carry on driving safely.

Know the symptoms of a hypo – if you’ve lost hypo awareness, you can’t drive. 
Keep spare test strips in the car and bring your meter with you - even if you use Flash or CGM. 
Check your blood sugar levels before you set off and every two hours on long journeys.
Five to drive – your blood sugars have to be 5mmol/l or above before you drive. If they’re between 4mmol/l and 5mmol/l, eat some carbs before heading out.
If they’re under 4mmol/l – treat your hypo and check your levels again before driving.
Always keep hypo treatments where you can easily reach them in the car.
Take breaks on long journeys.
Don’t delay meals or snacks.
Remember, the rules are more complicated around diabetes and truck driving or if you want to drive a large vehicle, with a Group 2 licence.

When to check blood sugar levels for driving
If you usually check your blood sugar levels, then you must follow the rules about when to check them. This means checking them within two hours of driving – however short the trip. On longer journeys, you must check them every two hours.

It's fine to use a flash glucose monitor or a continuous glucose monitor to check your sugar levels before you drive.

These rules are only about checking for low blood sugar levels – the DVLA don’t have any specific limits on high blood sugar levels.

Speak to your healthcare team if you’re not sure whether you should be checking your blood sugars – it depends what medication you’re on.

If you start having a hypo while driving
It’s the law that you must stop. And it’s what you must do to avoid any risk of an accident. So find somewhere safe to pull in as soon as possible.

Thumbnail
Pull over safely. If you feel like your blood sugar is low then make sure you pull over as soon as possible. 
Switch off the engine. Take the keys out and move from the driver’s seat – if you don’t, the police can think you’re still in charge of the car and you could be prosecuted.
Take fast-acting carbs, like glucose tablets or sweets, and some longer-acting carbohydrates too, like plain biscuits or crackers.
Don’t drive until 45 minutes after your blood sugar level has gone back to 5mmol/l or above. This is the time it takes for your concentration to go back to normal.  
If you’re struggling with hypos, talk to your healthcare team about whether you should be driving. 

You don’t need to let the DVLA know that you’ve had a hypo – only if it’s a severe hypo (where you need help to treat it). Severe hypos are a lot more serious so the rules are more detailed. We have more information about severe hypos if you don't know what they are.

Diabetes and car insurance
Most car insurance companies won’t charge more if you have diabetes. You should complain if they do and if you’re still not happy then try somewhere else.
You’ll have to declare your diabetes as a material fact when applying for insurance. We’ve information about insurance and diabetes to help you.

Driving for work when you have diabetes
If you drive as your job or use a car to get to work, you’re bound to worry about how changes to your driving licence could affect your job.

We have lots of advice and information on driving and work to help you understand what your rights are.

Can diabetes affect your driving license?
If you have your licence revoked then you can nearly always reapply for it after some time. It depends why you lost your licence. The most common reason is because of severe hypos, which is where you need help and can’t treat it on your own. 

You can apply for a new licence up to eight weeks before the date given on your refusal notice. What happens then will depend on why your licence was taken away. We have lots more information on what happens if you lose your licence.

F:Myth: People with diabetes can't play sport
People with diabetes are encouraged to exercise as part of a healthy lifestyle. Keeping active can help reduce the risk of complications associated with diabetes, such as heart disease. Steve Redgrave, Olympic gold medal-winning rower, has achieved great sporting achievements in spite of having diabetes.

However, there may be some considerations to take into account before taking up a new exercise regime. Talk to your healthcare team for more information.

Exercise for diabetes
Being physically active is good for diabetes whatever type you have. This also includes people with prediabetes. Whether you feel able to go for a run or a swim or can manage some arm stretches or on-the-spot walking while the kettle boils, it all makes a difference.
That’s because being physically active helps insulin work better in your body – either the insulin you take or the insulin your body makes. This helps keep your blood sugar levels within target and helps prevent other health problems linked to diabetes, known as complications.

Find out the other benefits of being more physically active and our advice on where to start. Think of it simply as ‘activity’. You don’t have to join a gym or wear Lycra to do that.  

Benefits of exercise
There are many benefits of being active when you have type 1, type 2 or other types of diabetes. Moving more can:

Help your body use insulin better. If you take insulin, regular activity may reduce how much you need to take by reducing insulin resistance.  
Help you keep your blood sugar levels within target range and improve your HbA1c
Help some people with type 2 diabetes put it into remission
Help reduce blood pressure and improve cholesterol which helps protect against other health problems caused by diabetes like heart disease. 
Help you lose weight if you need to and keep the weight off after you’ve lost it. 
Give you energy and help you sleep 
Help your joints and flexibility 
Help your mind as well as your body - exercise releases endorphins, which you could think of as happy hormones. Being active is shown to reduce stress levels and improve low mood. 
Best exercise for diabetes
There isn’t one type of physical activity that’s best for everyone with diabetes. 

What’s important is that it gets your body moving more, that you enjoy it and that it fits into your life at a time that works for you. And that it’s appropriate for any pain or other health problems you have including diabetes complications. 

Starting small is sensible if you are new to exercise and have pain or haven’t been active for a while. It means you won’t overdo it and can stop if something hurts.

If you use insulin or other medication that lowers your blood sugar levels, it’s important to check your blood sugar levels before and after exercise. See our page on exercise and blood sugar levels.  

Walking, if you can, is often a good place to start. You don’t need to join a fitness class or a gym, unless that’s something you’d enjoy.

Exercise can be as simple as kicking a ball round the park with your grandchild or having a paddle if you’re on holiday.  

Sports popular with people becoming more active include bowls, dancing, walking football and walking netball. 

Nearly any activity can be adapted to suit your own needs. For example, you might want to try seated stretches instead of standing ones or try walking in a swimming pool rather than on land so you can avoid putting weight on your joints.

Setting targets
If you haven’t been active for a while, setting yourself realistic targets can help such as a 10-minute walk after a meal, rather than expecting yourself to meet NHS physical activity targets overnight. Each step you take to move more can help with managing your diabetes. The small victories count.  

Two ladies with diabetes walking together and enjoying exercising
To help you start this journey we've created Your guide to Moving More (PDF, 2.9MB) to help you start this journey. There's space for you to plan your activity and track your progress, as well as lots of information to support you along the way.

 

Don’t be hard on yourself if there are days you feel tired and unmotivated.  You could try resting in the morning, and then introducing some movement into your afternoon. However, sometimes you need a break or time to relax, and it’s okay to do that. 

Breaking up periods of inactivity 
Breaking up long periods of sitting or lying down regularly can help lower your blood sugar levels. So, for example, you might stand up for a while every 30 to 45 minutes or make phone calls standing up.

Standing uses up more than twice as much energy (calories) as sitting as well as being better for your body. 

Ideas for keeping active at home
on-the-spot walking during TV ad breaks 
stretches for your arms and legs whilst sat in a chair 
vacuuming your home or washing your car 
gardening - if you have a garden. If you don’t, do you have any house plants you can water, prune and re-pot while standing up.
put some music on and have a dance
stand up for work meetings or phone calls and consider a standing desk.
Ideas for keeping active when out and about
It’s surprising how a slight change of routine can increase your physical activity levels and help you feel better when you’re living with diabetes. This could include:  

getting off the bus or tube one stop earlier, or parking further away from your destination 
taking the stairs instead of the lift or escalator  
carrying your shopping home. The bags will act as weights.
walking or cycling for small journeys, rather than using a car or public transport.
Ideas for keeping active at work
When you have diabetes, it's important to keep active at work particularly if you’re sitting in front of a computer for a long time. You could try:  

walking meetings, using hands free equipment to chat whilst moving around in a safe environment   
standing when you’re on the phone or trying to use a standing desk 
chair-exercises like sitting and lifting your arms up 
putting set break times in your work diary every day and using the time to be more active - eg going for a walk and getting some fresh air 
stretching for 5 minutes after every meeting; this can also be a great way to relieve stress. 
Doing exercise classes or online workouts
If you’re more motivated by following a routine, you may find video workouts helpful. There are lots to choose from. 

""
Try one of our free video workouts with Celene and other fitness instructors suitable for people with diabetes — from 4 minutes to 30 minutes, on our YouTube channel.

Staying connected with others can also help with both your physical and mental health. So think about getting moving with family, friends or neighbours. Or even doing one of our fundraising events that helps you get active and raise money so we can keep working towards a world where diabetes can do no harm.

Are there any unsuitable exercises for diabetes?
If you have type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes or other types of diabetes, you’re able to take part in almost every type of physical activity.  You may need to meet certain criteria and have a medical assessment for extreme activities such as scuba diving, sky diving and mountaineering. For diving guidance, see more information on the diabetes page of the UK Diving Medical Committee website.

Speak to your healthcare team
It’s good to be active but you also need to take care of your body. Before trying any new exercises it’s important you check with your GP first. They can help you decide what’s safe and consider any complications you have. 

Exercise and diabetes complications
You can still exercise if you have diabetes complications such as problems with your eyes or heart, but you’ll need to think a bit more about the activity you choose. And talk it through with your healthcare team. For example, you should avoid high-intensity activity such as High intensity interval training (HIIT)  and heavy lifting. But there are other gentler, low-impact exercises you can try such as swimming, cycling or walking.   

Nerve disease
Do mostly activities where you aren’t putting weight on your feet, for example, swimming or chair-based exercises, especially if your gait – the way that you walk – has changed or if you have a foot deformity. If you have regular appointments with a foot care specialist or team, always talk to them about whether an activity is suitable for you before starting something new.
If you have foot ulcers, avoid weight bearing activity, including jogging.
If you have postural hypotension , avoid activities with rapid changes in direction, such as squash and tennis to avoid falling or fainting.
Eye disease
If you have moderate or severe non-proliferative retinopathy , avoid activities that dramatically raise your blood pressure, such as sprinting and lifting weights.
Kidney disease
If microalbuminuria is present, most activities are safe, but avoid vigorous exercise the day before urine protein tests
With overt nephropathy, also called macroalbuminuria, (and if on dialysis), it's best to avoid high-intensity and strenuous exercise.
Foot problems
If you have problems with your feet, such as neuropathy or foot ulcers, you might need to avoid certain types of weight-bearing activity like jogging. Chair-based exercises might be better for you, like raising your legs one after the other or lifting cans of food while you’re sitting down. 

It's also important to use suitable footwear when exercising, and make sure to regularly check your feet for any changes in the way they look or feel. 

Tips to help with fear of hypos 
People who use insulin or medications that can lower blood sugar levels often say that the biggest barrier to being more physically active is a fear of hypos. But the benefits of physical activity on your diabetes and overall health far outweigh the risks. So we've put together some tips to help you:

Keep plenty of fast-acting hypo-friendly carbohydrates, like sugary drinks and glucose tablets, to hand just in case you need them can help build your confidence. And reassure you that you will be safe while being more active.
Reduce hypo anxiety by making sure you check your blood sugar levels regularly so you get to learn how your body reacts to certain movements. And starting with just a few minutes of activity and building up gradually over days and weeks.
Some people also find using a continuous glucose monitor (CGM) a quick and reassuring way to keep an eye on how activity is affecting their blood sugar levels. You can also review the effect of activity on your blood sugar levels afterwards. But tech isn’t suitable for everyone and not everyone is eligible. Everyone with type 1 diabetes, some people with type 2 diabetes and gestational diabetes should be considered for one of these devices. For more information, see the Who qualifes for a CGM page. 
Being physically active can affect your blood sugar levels in different ways. So we’ve also put together some guidance on how to manage blood sugar levels when exercising including snacking.  

Everyone is different but in general, gentle activity where you don't get out of breath quickly, such as walking, swimming and cycling, tends to lower blood sugar levels. However, activities that have short, fast, powerful movements where you get out of breath quickly, such as sprinting, punching and weight-lifting, tend to make your blood sugar levels go up. Other factors such as stress and the weather may also have an impact.

G:Myth: People with diabetes are more likely to get colds and other illnesses
Not true. While there is some medical research that may suggest people with diabetes are at higher risk of developing illnesses, there’s nothing to prove this conclusively. But there are certain illnesses that are more common in people with diabetes, and diabetes may also alter the course of an illness – for example, a person with diabetes may become more unwell or be unwell for longer than a person without diabetes.

Diabetes when you're unwell
It's important to know how to manage your diabetes when you're ill.
Some people will know this as diabetes sick day rules.

You'll need to know how to manage your insulin doses and other diabetes medications, as well as monitoring your blood glucose (sugar) and ketone levels along with diet.

This is really important if you go into hospital or if you need to take steroids as part of your treatment.

Always tell the healthcare professionals treating you that you have diabetes and how you manage and monitor it.

How illness affects diabetes
Illness and infections, as well as other forms of stress, can raise your blood glucose (sugar) levels to dangerously high levels. As part of the body’s defence mechanism for fighting illness and infection, more glucose is released into the blood stream. This can happen even if you’re off your food or eating less than usual.

People who don’t have diabetes just produce more insulin to cope. But when you’ve got diabetes, your body can’t do this. The symptoms of having diabetes can add to those of your illness or infection and make it much worse.

Feeling or being sick, or having diarrhoea can make your blood sugar levels drop, because you're not absorbing food as usual.

Being dehydrated when you have diabetes
Having a temperature or being sick can lead to dehydration. In some cases, severe dehydration and very high blood sugar levels can mean that you need to go into hospital. 

So it’s important to be prepared and follow our advice on coping when you're sick. You might want to give this information to a friend or family member, so they can help you if you get sick.

Your sick day rules - how to manage diabetes when you're sick
Don't panic – contact your diabetes team who will help you if you have any queries or if you are unsure about what to do.
Keep taking your diabetes medications – even if you don't feel like eating. But there are some medicines that you shouldn’t take as much of or you should stop taking altogether. Make sure you talk to your diabetes team or speak to a local pharmacist as soon as you’re feeling ill so they can give you the right advice.
Insulin may need to be increased or decreased when you're unwell, talk to your diabetes team for further advice on how to manage your insulin doses during illness.
If you check your blood sugars at home you'll probably need to do it more often – at least every four hours, or as advised by your healthcare team, including during the night. If you don't test your blood sugars at home, be aware of the signs of a hyper (hyperglycaemia).
Stay hydrated – have plenty of unsweetened drinks and eat little and often.
If you have type 1 diabetes it’s important to check ketone levels if your blood sugar levels are above your target range (usually above 14mmmol/l) and as advised by your healthcare team. But they may have given you different targets. Regardless of what your blood sugars are saying, if you're sick, test for ketones and If you find them, contact your healthcare team.
If you take a certain type of diabetes tablet called SGLT2i and become unwell with an illness or infection you should temporarily stop taking these.
You need to check your ketones and your blood sugars (if you've been told to do this and have the kit), and speak to your healthcare team. There are different types of SGLT2i tablets so check our list for all the brand names. Taking these tablets when you're not very well could increase your risk of developing diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), so you need to know the symptoms to look out for.
Keep eating or drinking – if you can’t keep food down try eating little and often. Try snacks or drinks with carbohydrates in to give you energy. Try to sip sugary drinks like fruit juice or non-diet coke or lemonade or suck on glucose tablets or sweets like jelly beans. If you are being sick letting fizzy drinks go flat may help keep them down. If you're still not able to keep any fluids down get medical help as soon as possible. 
If you're taking steroids
Some conditions, like Addison's disease, severe asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, lupus and coronavirus are treated with steroids. If you have diabetes, taking high doses of steroids for periods of time can make your blood sugar levels rise. This is called steroid-induced hyperglycaemia. Your doctor or nurse will talk to you about this. They may ask you to make some changes to how you manage your diabetes, so that you can keep your blood sugar levels within your target range. 

Some people with coronavirus are treated with a type of steroid called dexamethasone. Not everyone with coronavirus will need this steroid – it’s used in hospital or in virtual wards when someone is really unwell and needs help to breathe. Some people may be treated with dexamethasone at home. It works by reducing the inflammation that coronavirus can cause and supports your immune system to fight it.

While this works well for treating coronavirus, the side effects can affect blood sugars. Dexamethasone makes your body more resistant to insulin and raises blood sugar levels. If you already take insulin you should speak to your healthcare team who will advise on any changes to insulin doses that may be required to help reduce your blood sugar levels.

If you don’t have diabetes and are prescribed steroids, it’s important to know that taking this medication could cause diabetes to develop later on. This is called steroid-induced diabetes. We've got more information about the condition, including the symptoms to look out for. You can also speak to your healthcare team for more guidance and advice.

H:Myth: Having diabetes means you can't do certain jobs
Having diabetes should not stop you from getting and keeping a job. However, despite the Equality Act 2010 (Disability Discrimination Act in Northern Ireland), people with diabetes still face blanket bans in some areas of employment, including the armed forces. Diabetes UK campaigns to lift discriminatory blanket bans. 

I:Myth: People with diabetes can't wear flight socks
Many flight socks carry the warning that they are not suitable for people with diabetes. If you have any circulatory problems or complications with your feet, such as ulcers, then speak to your GP before using them. If, however, your feet and legs are generally healthy and you are normally active, using flight socks is unlikely to do you any harm.

J: Myth: People with diabetes can't eat grapes, mangoes or bananas
People sometimes think that if they have diabetes they can't eat grapes and bananas as they taste sweet. But if you eat a diet that includes these fruits, you can still achieve good blood glucose control. In fact, grapes and bananas, like all fruit, make a very healthy choice.

Fruit is high in fibre, low in fat and full of vitamins and minerals. It helps to protect against heart disease, cancer and certain stomach problems.

Fruit, vegetables and diabetes
Warm exotic fruit salad
Everyone should be eating more fruit and vegetables. You're probably aware of the five-a-day minimum target, and this is equally important if you’re living with diabetes or if you’re not. 
This is because fruit and vegetables are associated with lower risk of heart disease and certain types of cancers. They also have a good mix of soluble and insoluble fibre which is good for your bowels and general health and they provide a range of vitamins and minerals. 

They can also help people living with diabetes manage their blood pressure and blood cholesterol.  

In this guide: 

How much sugar is in fruit and vegetables? 
Juices and smoothies 
Portion sizes 
Lesser-known fruit and vegetables 
How to increase your fruit and veg intake 
Recipe ideas 
How much sugar is in fruit and vegetables? 
You might think that the sugar content of fruit, and some vegetables, means that you can’t eat them. But the sugar in whole fruit and veg does not count towards free sugars, so it is not this type of sugar we need to cut down on. This is different to the free sugar in drinks, chocolate, cakes and biscuits, as well as in fruit and vegetable juices and honey. 

A portion of fruit, such as a medium-sized apple, generally contains about 15 to 20g carbs as well as other important nutrients. And many fruits and veg have a low-to-medium glycaemic index (GI), which tells us whether a food raises blood glucose levels quickly, moderately or slowly.

It is better to reduce your intake of high-sugar, high-fat snacks and drinks such as chocolate, fizzy drinks, cakes and crisps, rather than whole fruit or veg when trying to restrict your carb intake to help manage your blood glucose levels and overall health.  

For people who follow a low-carb diet, it is important to identify the sources of carbs that are not healthy and cut those down first.  

It is unlikely that you need to reduce your fruit or veg intake but you could keep a food diary to check how often and how much fruit you are eating.  

Some people eat fruit infrequently, but have larger portions when they do eat them, which can mean the carbohydrate portion in one sitting is quite high. It is easy to consume a lot of dried fruit, grapes and tropical fruits in one go, for example, and this can have a bigger impact on blood glucose levels. 

If you consider a serving of dried fruit is one tablespoon, or 30g, and has as much as 20g carbs, you can see how easily this happens.  

Being mindful of your serving sizes can help too – a large banana counts for one and half portions of fruit and contains about 30g carbs. But most people need to cut down on foods with free sugars and refined carbs rather than whole fruit – a large banana is still better for your long-term health than a standard slice of cake, which contains about 25g carbohydrate.  

Remember to spread your fruit intake throughout the day so you are not eating a lot of carbohydrate all in one go, which could affect blood glucose levels after eating. 

Why do I need to be careful about fruit and vegetable juices and smoothies? 
Peach and raspberry smoothie
Peach and raspberry smoothie
We’ve mentioned juices and smoothies and these are something that, ideally, need to be avoided or at least cut down on.  

This is because fruit and vegetable juice and smoothies have most of the roughage removed or already broken down, so the sugar from the fruit or vegetable becomes free sugars and the fibre is much easier to digest. This makes it is very easy to drink large quantities in a short space of time – and ultimately this means extra calories and carbohydrate.  

Having less intact fibre means fruit juices and smoothies are not as beneficial to the body compared to whole fruits. 

A serving – 150ml (and most people’s glasses at home will contain more than this) – provides about 15g carbs which counts towards free sugar, so you can see how easily it is to take in a lot of carbohydrate and free sugar without really noticing. 

What’s in a portion of fruit and vegetables? 
As a guide, a portion of fresh fruit and veg is 80g - roughly what fits into the palm of an adult hand. Public Health England suggest the following as a guide: 

Small-sized fresh fruit 

One portion is two or more small fruit, for example two plums, two satsumas, two kiwi fruit, three apricots, six lychees, seven strawberries or 14 cherries. 

Medium-sized fresh fruit 

One portion is one piece of fruit, such as one apple, banana, pear, orange or nectarine. Why not mix things up and try Sharon fruit? Eat it like a peach when firm, or blend soft ones with unsweetened yoghurt. 

Large fresh fruit 

One portion is half a grapefruit, one slice of papaya, one slice of melon (5cm slice), one large slice of pineapple or two slices of mango (5cm slices). Papaya, or pawpaw, is a tropical fruit shaped like a pear. When ripe, its skin is a deep yellow or orange with sweet and fragrant flesh, similar to a peach. Add to a fruit salad or simply slice and enjoy. 

Dried fruit 

A portion of dried fruit is around 30g. This is about one heaped tablespoon of raisins, currants or sultanas, one tablespoon of mixed fruit, two figs, three prunes or one handful of dried banana chips. 

Tinned fruit in natural juice 

One portion is roughly the same quantity of fruit that you would eat for a fresh portion, such as two pear or peach halves, six apricot halves or eight segments of tinned grapefruit. 

Vegetables 

One portion is: 

2 broccoli spears, 2 heaped tablespoons of cooked spinach, or 4 heaped tablespoons of cooked kale, spring greens or green beans  
3 heaped tablespoons of cooked carrots, peas or sweetcorn  
8 cooked cauliflower florets  
2 large handful of salad leaves  
3 heaped tablespoons of beans or pulses  
Lesser-known fruit and vegetables 
Meal times can be a fantastic opportunity to pack in more vegetables. Add more variety to your diet by choosing different vegetables. There is huge variety of lesser known veg that is just as good for you: 

Cavolo nero, or black cabbage, is part of the brassica family. Try it in soups and salads, or with meat and fish. 
Fennel is bulb-like in shape and has a strong aniseed flavour, and crisp texture. Eat it raw in salads, or cook it to tone down the flavour. 
Broccoflower is a cross between green cauliflower and Romanesco broccoli, which stands out for its spiky, green head. It tastes sweeter than broccoli or cauliflower, but you can cook it in the same way. 
Samphire has vibrant green stalks similar to baby asparagus. It has a crisp texture and tastes of the sea. Try it with seafood dishes. Boil or steam for a few minutes before serving. 
Kohlrabi is a bulbous, pale green brassica. It has a mild and sweet flavour, and crispy texture. Try roasting, steaming or stir-frying it. Or try it sliced up and added to salads – blanch the slices in boiling water first. 
Daikon is a mild, white radish, which is shaped like a carrot, and is popular in Japanese, Chinese, and Indian cuisine. Daikon can be eaten raw or cooked, and will add a peppery kick to salads and stir-fries. 
How can I increase my fruit and veg intake? 
Variety is important as different coloured fruit and veg contain their own mixture of vitamins and minerals, so feel free to make changes and choose as many different types as possible. Go for whatever is in season to help keep costs down, too.

Try these 10 ways of increasing your intake which are practical and also good for your health: 

Apples, clementines, bananas, rhubarb, broccoli and cabbage are good sources of vitamin C, which is good for boosting your immune system and wound healing. 
Dried raisins are a source of iron, which is needed to make the oxygen carrying part of your blood. 
Rhubarb contains calcium, which is needed for bone formation. 
Look out for kids-sized apples and ‘easy peeling’ clementines in shops and add them into your children’s lunch boxes. 
Cooking apples taste great when baked with a little cinnamon and nutmeg served with unsweetened Greek yoghurt. You could also chop and stew them with a little water and raisins for a healthy desert ready to hand when you fancy something sweet. 
Bananas can be baked or frozen for an hour or two and then taken out to be mashed into a healthy take on ice cream. 
Veg like parsnips, beetroot and carrot are great for making into crisps.  
The portion of tinned and frozen fruit and vegetables is the same quantity as you would eat for a fresh portion. 
Double check the label for tinned fruit and veg, swap fruits in syrup to those in juice to reduce your intake of free sugars, and opt for vegetables in water with no added salt or sugar.   
If fruit juice is your preferred treatment for hypos, it comes in handy sized cartons which are portable. But try not to drink it on other occasions.
5-a-day: practical ways to reach the target. 
For breakfast: 

Adding sliced banana to your cereal for breakfast and remember to reduce your usual amount of cereal to make room for the fruit 
Adding mushrooms and tomatoes with your cooked breakfast 
A  fruit salad topped with no added sugar yoghurt. 
For lunch: Have a healthy side salad, instead of crisps, with a sandwich and replace snacks with fruits and veg, for example, raisins and sultanas, fruit salads, raw vegetables, vegetable sticks, frozen berries. 
 
For evening meals: Dish out the vegetables first like carrots, aubergines, broccoli, cabbages etc, and let that form the biggest part of the plate and add more vegetables to your casseroles, stews, soups etc. 

Top Tip: Fruit and vegetables are better eaten raw as some nutrients are lost through cooking. Try steaming, poaching or microwaving rather than boiling in a lot of water if you prefer them cooked and add some spices and herbs if you find vegetables bland.

Try these recipes 
Sticking to a healthy, balanced diet can sometimes seem like a slog. You might find yourself stuck in a rut, recycling the same few recipes. So, for something new, try these tasty recipes that are packed full of veggies. 

Salmon on fennel ratatouille 

A gluten-free dish of steamed salmon served over bed of ratatouille.

Roasted vegetable pizza 

This gorgeous gluten-free pizza is a great idea for people with or without coeliac disease, and healthier than a takeaway version. 

Kale and green lentil soup 

A nutritious, flavoursome soup that's quick and simple to make. Vary the vegetables according to your personal tastes. 

Mediterranean pasta salad 

This makes an excellent packed lunch option - with all the Mediterranean flavours it's a nice alternative to sandwiches. 

Smoky tofu kebabs 

A delicious vegetarian alternative to meat kebabs. With thanks to celebrity chef Sophie Grigson for this recipe. 

Spinach, red onion and potato tortilla 

This is perfect warm or cold – perfect for lunch on-the-go, a picnic or barbecue. 

Macaroni cheese 

Skimmed milk and reduced-fat Cheddar, with added vegetables, makes this a lower-fat but tastier and better-balanced dish. 

Vegetable chilli 

This versatile dish can be served with rice or baked sweet potatoes, wrapped with a salad, or made into enchiladas, tacos or nachos. 

Black-eyed bean, feta and herb burger 

A tasty meat-free burger packed with protein. Can be served with or without a bun and alongside helpings of salad. 

Bean and mushroom enchiladas 

A hearty family meal that’s easy to make, cheap and nutritious. Can be eaten hot or cold. 

Pad Thai 

Stir-fried noodles and vegetables with a spicy, slightly sweet flavour. Packed with vegetable and nut goodness.

K:Myth: People with diabetes can't cut their own toenails
Not true: the general advice on toenail cutting applies to everyone. If you have diabetes you should keep your nails healthy by cutting them to the shape of the end of your toes. Don't cut them straight across, curved down the sides, or too short. Remember, your nails are there to protect your toes.

It is safest to trim your nails with a pair of nail clippers and to use an emery board to file the corners of your nails. If it is difficult for you to care for your nails, you should seek help from a podiatrist.

It is important to realise that there is a lot of misinformation out there. Make sure you get your information from reliable sources, such as your diabetes healthcare team or Diabetes UK.
How to look after your feet
If you live with diabetes, you’re much more likely to develop problems with your feet. These problems can be serious and can cause ulcers or infections and for some people these problems could lead to amputations.
But most problems, including amputations, can be prevented. If you take care of your feet and check them regularly, you can reduce your risk of developing foot problems.  

How to check your feet
For simple steps to healthy feet and how to check them, watch our video.

Diabetes and footcare
If you’ve lost feeling in your feet, it may be harder to look after them. Speak to your healthcare team as you may need help from a podiatrist or foot protection service. You can learn more here about the relationship between diabetes and foot problems, and read our tips below for looking after your feet.

You can also order or download our free guide to looking after your feet from our shop:

Diabetes and Looking After Your Feet is available to download in 9 different languages or you can order a printed version in English, Polish or Romanian.

10 simple steps to prevent foot problems
If you want a few pointers on looking after your feet, then take our simple steps to healthy feet: 

Get help to quit smoking
Manage your blood sugars, cholesterol and blood pressure
Check your feet every day
Eat a healthy, balanced diet and stay active
Cut your nails carefully
Make sure your footwear fits
Use moisturising cream every day
Don’t use blades or corn plasters
Get expert advice
Keep useful numbers handy
 
1. If you smoke, stop
Smoking makes it harder for blood to circulate and move around your body, including to your feet. This puts you at even more of a risk of amputation.  

If you think you might need help to stop smoking, take the first step and ask your healthcare team for support.

2. Manage your blood sugar levels, cholesterol and blood pressure
Keeping your blood sugar levels as close to your target range as possible can be difficult but can help prevent damage to your feet or stop the damage from getting worse. We've got lots of information to help you manage your blood pressure, cholesterol and how to check your blood sugar levels.

You can go on diabetes education courses to help you manage your diabetes. Speak to a healthcare professional about which course is right for you. 

You could also speak to a support group or our our helpline. Together, we can help you manage your diabetes. 

3. Check your feet every day
Because of diabetes, foot problems can get worse quickly, especially if the feeling in your feet has changed. That’s why it’s important to check them every day.  

Look at your feet before you put your socks on in the morning and before you go to bed. If you notice any changes, see a healthcare professional as soon as possible. 

If you struggle to lift your feet up, try using a mirror to check the bottom of your feet. Make sure you’re sitting or lying down if you’re using a mirror. Or you could get someone else to check your feet for you. If you live alone, ask a healthcare professional about how to check your feet.  

If you’ve lost any feeling in your feet, you need to be especially careful as you won't know if you've hurt yourself. If you’re unsure if you’ve lost any feeling, ask someone to help you do the foot sensitivity test or speak to a healthcare professional. 

4. Eat a healthy, balanced diet and keep active
Get support from a dietitian so you know what foods can help you manage your condition and how food affects you. We've got lots of information to help you eat a healthy and balanced diet.

Keeping active will help you manage your diabetes and reduce your risk of serious foot complications. Being active can be difficult, especially if you have problems with your feet or other issues with moving around. Read our information about diabetes and exercise. This has information and tips whatever your ability.   

5. Cut your nails carefully
If you have diabetes, cutting your skin by mistake can lead to other problems like ulcers or infections. And you might not even notice you’ve done it. 

So, take care when you cut your toenails: 

Cut them often but not too short or down the side. 
Trim them with nail clippers and then use an emery board to file any corners. 
Clean them gently with a nail brush. Don’t use the sharp points of scissors to clean as this isn’t safe. 
Washing your feet and toenails everyday will keep them clean and free from infection. Do this with a mix of soap and warm water. Always check the temperature with your wrist or elbow before you put your feet in. Avoid soaking your feet as this just makes the skin more likely to get damaged.  

If you’ve lost some feeling in your feet or you’re worried about things like ingrown toenails, see a foot specialist. They’re used to helping with these things. 

6. Make sure your footwear fits
Avoid shoes or socks that are too tight, too loose or rub. Shoes that don’t fit well, even those that feel comfortable, can cause problems or make existing conditions worse. As can old inner shoe linings or insoles, or socks with holes or thick seams.  

Check your footwear inside and out before putting them on. Make sure nothing sharp like a drawing pin has gone through the sole at the bottom of the shoe. And that nothing has fallen into them.   

Choose your footwear carefully.  

It’s good to buy shoes that: 

are wide fitting 
have a deep and rounded toe area 
are flat or low heeled 
are fastened by a lace or buckle to stop your feet from sliding around. 
Wear new shoes around the house for a short time (20-30 minutes) to check they are comfortable and do not rub.   

Shoes that have only been worn inside and for a short time can usually be taken back to the shop if they do not fit well. 

If you’re unsure of the fit or style that is best for you, then ask a registered podiatrist for advice. The Royal College of Podiatry has information on choosing suitable footwear.

7. Use moisturising cream every day
Using emollient cream, especially if it has a urea base, will keep your skin healthy. Emollients are moisturising treatments applied directly to the skin to soothe and hydrate it. Talk to your healthcare team about which emollient cream is right for you. 

Don’t put cream between your toes, as this can cause problems. The same for talcum powder, if it gets clogged up between your toes, it could make them too dry or cause rubbing between the toes that can affect the skin. 

8. Don’t use blades or corn plasters
Avoid plasters, creams and sprays for removing corns or verrucas. They can burn your skin and cause ulcers. Don’t use blades on your corns or tough skin as they could damage it. Pumice stones can help with tough skin but use them with care. If you need help with corns or other skin problems, speak to a podiatrist. 

9. Get expert advice
A trained professional should check your bare feet as part of your annual diabetes health check. But if you notice a problem with your foot sooner, ask for an appointment to get it checked as soon as you can rather than wait for your usual check.  

Once you’ve had your annual foot check, you should find out your risk of developing a serious foot problem. If you’re at moderate or high risk, your healthcare professional should explain exactly what this means and refer you for monitoring. They’ll also tell you if you need to see a foot specialist.  

Ask your foot specialist questions. The more you know, the more you can check any changes in your feet. 

10. Know who to call
Keep useful numbers nearby. This could be your GP surgery, your foot specialist and your out-of-hours service. 

L:Other frequently asked questions
Can I still travel if I have diabetes?
Of course. People with diabetes travel all over the world – you do not need to choose special holidays or curb your wander lust. The key is making the right preparations to minimise any potential problems and have an enjoyable safe trip.

Travelling with diabetes
Travelling with diabetes means there are a few more things to think about before you set off. But living with diabetes shouldn't be a barrier to taking trips or holidays at home or abroad.
Plan to take two to three times the amount of insulin or other diabetes medication and equipment you’d normally use. This will give you peace of mind if you have to stay longer for any reason or if there are disruptions.

If you’re travelling abroad, a little extra planning can go a long way to help you relax and enjoy yourself. Don't forget your doctor's letter and travel insurance. 

Use our tips below to skip to other information you need.

Organise medication with your healthcare team
What to pack in your hand luggage.
Flying with a CGM, insulin pump or Freestyle Libre
Crossing time zones
Looking after diabetes in hot climates
Looking after diabetes in cold climates
Checklist for people travelling with diabetes
Check your airline’s guidelines for people with diabetes
Contact your airline or other operator or look on their website for their guidelines for people living with diabetes. You may need to complete forms in advance, particularly if you use an insulin pump or continuous glucose monitor (CGM). You can also check health information for the country you’re visiting – follow the links on the Foreign travel advice page on the gov.uk website. 

Organise medication with your healthcare team
Get extra supplies of medication, device spares, and backup 
Ask your healthcare team for prescriptions for extra insulin, other diabetes medication, and if you use devices, extra supplies and manual equipment. Flying with an insulin pump, CGM or Freestyle Libre shouldn’t be a problem. But it is sensible to have back up in case of a failure. Expect to take two to three times the amount of medication or supplies you'd usually need. 

Get advice on adjusting insulin on long-haul flights
If you are going on a long-haul flight discuss this with your healthcare team. They will advise on any adjustments to your insulin injections or insulin pump - or medication that may be required if you are crossing time zones.

Request a travel letter about your diabetes 
In some cases, you may be required to get a letter from your healthcare team stating you have diabetes and that you need to carry medical supplies. The letter should include details about your medication, if for any reason you need to carry medication in containers over 100mls, and any devices that you use.

Please check with the airline before you travel as a letter may be requested by some airlines and other operators and is helpful in the event of an emergency.

It is also advisable to take a copy of a recent prescription with you in case you should need to get supplies whilst away. If you have the NHS app on your mobile phone this also shows your GP record and repeat prescription information.

Download a medical awareness card 
If you use a CGM, insulin pump, or Freestyle Libre, and are flying, download a Medical Device Awareness Card (PDF, 71KB) from the City Aviation Authority's website to go with your doctor's letter. The card is not essential, but it may make things easier. You show this to airport security officers with your letter, as it sets out the rules on screening if you wear a medical device. 

Check insulin supply in the destination country
Before travelling, find out where you can get supplies of insulin at your destination in case of emergency. Contact your insulin manufacturer before the trip to see if your insulin is supplied in the country you are travelling to. 

Insulin manufacturers - contact details
Manufacturer 	Contact number
Eli Lilly & Company 	01256 315000
Novo Nordisk Ltd	0800 0232 573
Sanofi	0800 035 2525
Wockhardt UK	01978 661261
Managing insulin when crossing time zones
Long-haul flights east or west involve crossing time zones. And you may need to adjust your insulin. Eastward travel will shorten the day, and generally mean a temporary reduction in insulin doses, whereas westward travel will extend the day, and possibly increase insulin requirements.

Speak to your healthcare team for advice about adjusting your insulin doses. Have your flight details to hand including your departure time, the length of the flight, and the local time of arrival.

Time zones and tablets
If you take diabetes tablets, you are unlikely to have any particular problems. Very occasionally, it may be necessary to take extra tablets to cover a longer day. Do discuss this with your diabetes care team beforehand. 

You may, on occasions, need to leave out one dose of tablets on a short day, when you are travelling on a long west to east journey. Speak to your diabetes care team about this well in advance of the trip.

Crossing time zones and using an insulin pump, CGM or Freestyle Libre 
If you are going on a long-haul flight, you may cross different time zones. 

When crossing different time zones, you may need to change the time or date on some insulin pumps manually so you get the correct basal insulin dose. Speak with your healthcare provider before you travel to get their advice on which settings to change and when. 

If you use an app, the date and time on smartphones should automatically update when travelling across time zones. If you use a Freestyle Libre reader, you will manually need to adjust the time for accurate reports. 

Storing insulin
If you're travelling somewhere hot, remember that heat can damage your insulin and stop it from working properly. Insulin damaged by heat may have a brownish colour, and clear insulin may become cloudy. Do not use insulin that looks like this. 

When travelling with insulin, it is best to keep it cool by storing it in a hotel fridge (if there is one in your room) or in a cool bag (providing it does not freeze). A variety of cool bags and storage containers are available. If using a cool bag that uses plastic ice blocks, make sure that the insulin does not come into contact with the frozen plastic containers.

Get more information on managing diabetes in hot weather.

Storing insulin in cold climates
Insulin can freeze in very extreme temperatures but cannot be used if it has been frozen, so if you are planning to visit the arctic (or somewhere equally cold) make sure you keep insulin at room temperature or even on you in an inside pocket or pouch close to your body, to ensure it doesn’t freeze. 

Get more information on managing diabetes in cold weather.

Get travel insurance
If you have diabetes, travel insurance is important. You want peace of mind that any emergency medical costs for your diabetes or any other medical condition is covered. 

Make sure that any travel insurance covers pre-existing medical conditions like diabetes, as many don’t. It’s also really important you ask if they cover coronavirus in case you need treatment while you’re away. 

You can also check health information for the country you’re visiting – see the Foreign travel advice page on the gov.uk website.

UK residents travelling to the EU still have access to emergency and necessary healthcare. (See the guidance on travelling with an existing medical condition if you go to the EU).

However, we still advise that you get travel insurance because free health cover provided by the European Health Insurance Card (EHIC) and Global Health Insurance Card (GHIC) doesn’t cover certain things like emergency repatriation (if you need to come home) and not all countries give the same level of cover as the NHS. 
 

If you have diabetes and planning a trip, we can help you get coronavirus-covered travel insurance with AllClear Insure My Diabetes.

What to pack in your hand luggage
All diabetes medication 
Diabetes supplies – including sensors and other device spares
Diabetes identity card or wrist band
A letter from your doctor about your diabetes and treatment and if you use an insulin pump, CGM or flash glucose monitor.
A prescription sheet
Hypo treatments 
Extra snacks in case of delays like nuts, fruit or a sandwich.

Split meds between separate bags if you can, for example, if you’re travelling with a partner or friend, in case you lose something. 

"Be prepared. I always travel with a backpack full of snacks, medication and everything I need. I don't rely on airport shops being open or other amenities. And when I'm in the mountains, I always have at least three snacks with me." Read Lee's story.

Can I carry insulin in my hand luggage?
Always carry insulin, other diabetes medication, device spares, hypo treatments and other diabetes supplies in hand luggage. It’s important to keep insulin in hand luggage as being in the hold can damage it as it’s so cold and luggage can be lost. 

Sensors or other device spares must go in hand luggage as they can be damaged by hold luggage X-rays.

Medication restrictions at the airport
Carrying a doctor’s letter from your GP is requested by some airlines and is helpful to show airport security if there is any confusion.  

Current security regulations state that liquid items are only allowed in your hand luggage if they are in containers 100mls or less. There is no restriction on the number of tablets you can take through airport security but they should be mentioned in your doctor’s letter.

Flying with an insulin pump, CGM or Freestyle Libre
It's sensible to look up the manufacturer's advice on flying with your particular device.

Insulin pumps are safe for use during air travel and you can continue to use CGM or flash glucose sensors whilst flying. Connect them to the handset or your phone using Bluetooth. They will still work if your phone is on airplane mode. 

If you use an insulin pump, be aware that changes in air pressure when flying can change the amount of insulin delivered by the insulin pump. So it is important to monitor your blood sugar levels more closely on flights, especially around take-off and landing.

When you buy your ticket, contact your airline or other operator or look on their website for their guidelines for people living with diabetes. You may need to complete forms in advance, particularly if you use an insulin pump or continuous glucose monitor (CGM). If you don't do this, in some cases it may cause delay.

If you use a CGM, insulin pump or Freestyle Libre, security staff may ask to see evidence that you need to use one – so you’ll need a letter from your GP or healthcare team to say so.

You can also print off a Medical Device Awareness Card (PDF, 71KB) from the Civil Aviation Authority website to go with your letter. This sets out screening advice for you (the passenger) and the security officer carrying out the checks.

You should also speak to your diabetes team before you go. They can give your more advice about travelling with diabetes on planes. And should you need to remove your pump for any reason, they can provide you with any extra equipment like insulin pens and help plan your doses throughout your journey.

"Since I've been using the Dexcom CGM I’ve been surfing, I’ve been on solo holidays, I’ve been abroad. I’ve done all the things I wasn’t sure I’d be able to do when I first got diagnosed." Georgia. 

Can CGMs, insulin pumps and Freestyle Libre sensors go through airport security scanners?
Not all diabetes technology can safely go through security checks at airports. It's important to speak with your healthcare team and look up the manufacturer's security scanning advice for your particular device. We have general guidance below.

Guidance on metal detectors and CGMs and pumps
Most types of CGM/Freestyle Libre sensors and insulin pumps can be taken through the metal detector arches that you walk through. 

X-ray luggage scanners, body scanners and CGMS and pumps 
Most types of CGM/Freestyle Libre sensors and insulin pumps - and any spare devices or sensors - should not be exposed to x-ray luggage scanners, hold luggage scanners or full body scanners.

If you don’t want to remove your CGM/sensor/insulin pump to go through a full body scanner, ask for a “pat down” instead. Please be aware that this may take some time, as a pat down might need to be completed by a specific member of staff, so it may be helpful to factor this into your travel plans and leave plenty of time to go through airport security.

You should never be asked to remove a medical device from your body for screening. And you should be offered alternative methods of screening.

Carrying a Medical Device awareness card (PDF, 71KB) along with your GP’s letter reminds you and the security staff of the screening advice for medical devices.

What to eat on the plane
Airlines can provide information on the times of most meals so you can plan your insulin.

It is best to order the standard meal, though this may not supply you with enough carbohydrates if you are on insulin or certain diabetes tablets. Cabin crew are usually able to provide fruit, crackers or rolls.

On long flights, you may need snacks in between meals and at bedtime to prevent blood sugar levels going too low. If you use insulin, monitor your blood sugar levels frequently and be prepared to make changes to your dosage.

Looking after diabetes in hot climates
In hot countries, the biggest health threat is the sun, so keep covered.

Wear clothes that cover and protect your skin and make sure you wear high factor sunscreen. People often miss the backs of their hands and necks, so make sure you keep these covered and protected with sunscreen.

Sunglasses should also have a UV400 label to make sure they protect your eyes. 

Take particular care of your feet if you have neuropathy which is numbness  in your feet. This can mean you’re not aware skin is burning so protect them from the sun with socks or sunscreen. Make sure you wear well-fitting sandals on the beach, so they don’t burn on the hot sand.

Sunbathing and blood sugar levels
Sunbathing on the beach can make your blood sugar levels higher than normal because you're not being very active.

Your insulin may be absorbed more quickly from the injection site in hot weather too, and this increases the risk of hypos. You’ll need to monitor your levels more often and be ready to adjust your diet or insulin dose. 

Be careful of misleading test results because the extremes of temperature may affect the accuracy of your blood glucose meter.

Find out more about diabetes and hot weather.

Looking after diabetes in cold weather and climates
In cold weather, your insulin may be absorbed more slowly at first, but can then be absorbed suddenly when you warm up later in the day. This can cause you to have a hypo. If your body also uses up more energy staying warm, for example shivering, this can lead to hypos too. So it can be useful to wear layers in colder climates which will both help to keep you warm and allow you to remove clothing if you need to as you warm up. 

Hypos are more dangerous in cold conditions. This is because they interfere with your body’s attempts to stay warm and increase the risk of hypothermia. So you may need to monitor your levels more often and be ready to adjust your diet or insulin dose if needed. 

Guarding against hypos is really important so remember your meter may not be accurate in cold conditions. If you are heading somewhere with extreme cold weather check the meter instructions for temperatures it will be accurate at and keep it wherever possible at room temperature. 

If you suffer from poor circulation or have neuropathy, it's particularly important to prevent frostbite, because the numbness in your feet can mean you don't feel the cold. Make sure you check your feet regularly in cold countries and take plenty of layers including spare socks.

Find out more about storing insulin.

Keeping to your diabetes routines when you're away
It’s important to remember your routines for managing diabetes when you’re abroad. Your job isn’t to avoid trying new things or enjoying yourself. It’s just to be aware that eating different foods, becoming more or less active or drinking alcohol can all make a difference to your blood sugar levels. So check regularly and keep yourself safe. 

“As well as a letter from my GP, my phone comes with a health app that I’ve put information about my diabetes and medication in. In an emergency, people can access this without having to unlock my phone.” Lucy.

If you have a tummy bug or you find yourself unable to eat or drink, follow your sick day rules. If you develop covid symptoms while abroad or during travel, you must review the local regulations and follow local public health guidance if available. 

M:Will I need extra support and where can I get it?
Managing your diabetes can at times seem incredibly demanding and some people find that support and encouragement can be really beneficial in helping them cope. Support should ideally come from someone you have regular contact with, maybe your partner, a friend, or someone from your healthcare team.

Ask your healthcare team about any support groups in your area. Diabetes UK's Helpline and local Diabetes UK groups can also provide support and information.

N:What education is available?
NHS guidelines recommend that people with diabetes be offered patient education programmes, known as structured education. All people with diabetes should receive the education and support they need to equip them with the necessary information and skills to manage their diabetes. Discuss with your healthcare team about suitable courses available in your area.

Diabetes education: learning to look after your diabetes
Having diabetes doesn't have to rule your life. It can feel overwhelming, but no matter how long since your diagnosis, you can benefit from support and information. It’ll help you manage your diabetes, so it's easier to live with and reduces your risk of developing complications. Ask your doctor or nurse about free diabetes education courses.

People who go on these courses often feel more confident about managing their diabetes, making healthier food choices, looking after themselves and meeting other people with diabetes. If you're supporting someone with diabetes, you can usually go along on a face-to-face course with them.

Examples of courses for type 2 diabetes and type 1 diabetes are:

DESMOND, for people living with type 2 diabetes. DESMOND stands for Diabetes Education and Self-Management for Ongoing and Newly Diagnosed
X-PERT for people living with type 2 diabetes
DAFNE for people living with type 1 diabetes
How to prevent diabetes courses for people at high risk of type 2 diabetes.

These courses are friendly and informal. You can learn face-to-face or online. There may be other diabetes education courses in your local area. 

We've got information about the main types of face-to-face courses you can go to and what to do if you need to get time off work. There's also information about online courses and our online platform Learning Zone.

How to get on a course
Everyone in the UK with diabetes should be offered a free diabetes course by their doctor, nurse or consultant. Courses aren't just for people who are newly diagnosed. You can ask to go on a course however long you've had diabetes. There are also courses for people at risk of developing type 2 diabetes. So do ask your GP or healthcare team what's available in your area. 

Learning to help your child
This page does not cover education for children and young people with diabetes. For children, young adults and families we offer Diabetes UK Type 1 Events run across the UK, which should be back in the autumn. And there is even a course teaching parents to carb count on our Learning Zone. We also have lots of useful information on our Children and diabetes section.  

"Going on a Desmond course for type 2 diabetes made a complete difference. I began to lose weight. I began to get my blood sugar levels down to where they should be, my cholesterol levels began to come down as well and I felt much more confident in myself that I could manage my diabetes. I began to feel my life was beginning to return to normal."

Malcolm Bigg, who did the course 4 years after being diagnosed 

Going on DAFNE has taken the guesswork out of diabetes. I found out how to take the correct does of insulin which has had a huge effect in terms of better control and greatly reduced hypos. To be honest, I just expected to meet some other diabetics and pick up a few tips. 

Graham Freer, who has type 1.5 diabetes and went on the course 20 years after diagnosis.

Face-to-face courses
Because of the coronavirus pandemic, some face to face courses were cancelled or changed to online. So check with your healthcare professional what's available.

Most courses are for small groups of ten people or fewer, and sometimes you’ll be able to bring a carer, partner or friend along with you. Sessions are usually led by nurses, dietitians or trained peers or educators.

There are specific courses for people with either type 1 or type 2 diabetes.

Courses last anywhere from half a day to one day or a couple of hours for six weeks, or up to five days. But you may be able to ask for time off work rather than taking holiday.  

Trained healthcare professionals will give you diabetes and lifestyle information and the practical skills you need to self-manage your diabetes. You’ll learn about diabetes and glucose, health changes, monitoring and medications, and how to make good food choices and stay active.

The courses are informal, friendly and non-judgemental – there’ll be no pressure on you to speak up if you don’t want to. You can share experiences with other people with diabetes and ask as many questions as you like.

Main types of face-to-face courses
Your diabetes healthcare team should be able to tell you what is available locally. The course may have one of the following names or be called by a local name. 

DESMOND – type 2 diabetes course
This one day course for people with type 2 diabetes is sometimes offered over two half days and gives you six hours' education. 

DESMOND stands for Diabetes Education and Self-Management for Ongoing and Newly Diagnosed. It will help you understand your diabetes, make food choices and take control of your blood glucose levels. 

 


X-PERT Diabetes Programme – type 2 diabetes course
This course for people with type 2 diabetes is usually run in two and a half hour sessions over six weeks, with a follow up session every year. 

You’ll learn how diabetes affects your body and how lifestyle changes can help you manage your condition. 

 


How to prevent diabetes courses – high risk of type 2
Speak to your doctor or nurse to find out if there are prevention courses running in your area.   

DAFNE – type 1 diabetes course
This is a five day course for people with type 1 diabetes. Don’t let the length of the course put you off. You may be able to ask for time off work. 

DAFNE stands for Dose Adjustment for Normal Eating. You’ll learn how to estimate the carbohydrates in each meal and inject the right dose of insulin, so you can fit diabetes into your own lifestyle. 
 

 

Online education courses 
BERTIE – type 1 diabetes course – no referral needed
The online BERTIE course is for people living with type 1 diabetes. It helps you understand and manage your diabetes in a way that’s right for you. You can simply register on the website and start the course.

Healthy living for people with type 2 diabetes
If you have type 2 diabetes and live in England, there's a new online education programme from the NHS called Healthy Living for people with type 2 diabetes.

Other online courses
There may be other online courses available in your area that you can ask to be signed up to. Ask your GP or healthcare professional for more information. 

Learning Zone
Our  online education service Learning Zone is there to help you if you have type 1 or type 2 diabetes or are supporting others who have the condition. It isn’t a replacement for an education course but the information is from our clinical team.

But if you can’t get onto an education course because of work or other commitments but you want to know more than Learning Zone is perfect. It's also useful for family and friends who are supporting you.

You’ll find practical advice from the experts and tips from people who have been there too – along with easy food swap, and ideas for getting active at home. 

Time off work
Going on a face-to-face course may mean you need to take time off work. You may be entitled to time off without taking holiday under the Equality Act.

Use our template letter (Word, 16KB) to write to your employer.

It may help to explain the benefits of attending to your employer. You can explain that if you do the course you’ll be less likely to take time off sick in the long run, as you’ll be better at managing your diabetes and so will reduce your risk of complications.

Some course providers, such as DAFNE, can provide materials to give to your employer about the benefits of going on a course. Your healthcare professional may also be able to write to your employer to support your case.




